#+INCLUDE: "../inc/header.html" export html
#+options: toc:nil
#+OPTIONS: html-postamble:nil
#+OPTIONS: html-style:nil
#+OPTIONS: num:nil p:nil pri:nil stat:nil tags:nil tasks:nil tex:nil timestamp:nil toc:nil title:nil
#+options: ^:{}
#+TITLE: suragu.net - Fear and loathing in Linux
#+HTML_HEAD_EXTRA: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/styles.css"/>

* Fear and loathing in Linux (Or BSD user tries Linux)

If you enjoy this article, please consider donating:
https://liberapay.com/raoul11. For questions or comments on this
article feel free to reach me out at teru-sama [at] riseup [dot] net.

One day I said "I want to die with FreeBSD installed", and I still do,
FreeBSD is a marvellous operating system that should be the final word
in operating systems. Sadly the other day when I bought a new computer
they pranked me very well because the network card this computer came
with is not supported in the current stable version of
FreeBSD. "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit, father, into
your hands, why have you forsaken me?" I said, but after some searches
I find that this network card WILL be supported and you can test the
driver in the -CURRENT branch of FreeBSD, I didn't thought -CURRENT
would be much of a pain, knowing I come from "bleeding edge" Linux
distributions. So I installed FreeBSD 14.0, the thing worked but when
I tried to install the required modules for xorg to work it didn't
work. And that's all they had to say. I want a stable system. Not
that.

Some time ago, when I published my [[./freebsd_as_desktop.html][FreeBSD as desktop]] blog post, I got
a comment in Hacker News (or lobsters, can't remember) that told me
that I was making clickbait because the experience was good. And the
title promised "Fear and loathing". Well, this one does have fear and
loathing.

So my first try was the old reliable. Void Linux, a distro that has
never failed me. Until yesterday, because when you come from BSD, you
know what's wrong with Linux.

Despite Xfce focuses on Linux operating systems and the BSD support
could be a lot better, because it sometimes can't tell the difference
between oss and pulse audio, or the microphone doesn't work, or other
kinds, doing trivial things was a lot easier on FreeBSD than in Void
Linux, but that's okay. I can with it, i've had worse things in my
life. So I could configure it. Then I wanted to install some packages
for void installation in which I could use my beloved [[https://git.raoul11.net/sakisafe.git][sakisafecli]]. But
when I installed it I found out what was wrong with Linux.

So i tried to run =bmake= in linux (BSD make is much better than GNU
make and should cover some trivial makefiles). And it started to give
errors, like curl.h is not found. And this is when a BSD user will
cause the Fall of Rome. In BSD operating systems, there are not
=-devel= (or -dev) packages. So when you install libfoo you install
the shared objects (.so files), the header files (the thing in
/usr/local/include) and sometimes the .a files for static linking
(which is something Linux distributions should also do). I don't think
it's very arguable that it is possitive to include the header files in
the same package. Because they're just text files that won't take a
lot of space. Maybe this is normal for some kind of devices, but if
you install arch linux or void in a amd64 machine i don't think you
care a lot about space.

That was the moment in which I remembered that one day a friend of my
told me that arch linux doesn't have -devel packages. And that was
enough for me to install Artix Linux, I don't even know what init
system I'm using.

Let the _fear and loathing_ begin.

** Operation: filesystem
The state of ZFS in Linux is quite commedic because OpenZFS is under
the CCLD and Linux is on the GPL and CCDL is incompatible with the
GPL. So because of the GPL we can't have ZFS endorsed by the kernel on
Linux systems. Just because the GPL, I don't think it's pretty good
that a so-called "free" software license tells you that you *must*
share your changes. And I think it's pretty idiotic that, because a
License, they can't add a sequence of ASCII characters to a kernel.

It was pretty funny because one day I found this message regarding
btrfs on FreeBSD on the forums:

[[../img/freebsd_user_on_btrfs.png]]

When I was installing Artix and it was part to create the partitions,
I audibly chuckled, and I selected btrfs as my file system. And began
using btrfs because I'm always open to try new things.

As mentioned before, the state of ZFS on Linux is commedic, because of
differences between Artix and Arch, I couldn't install the 3rdparty
zfs module from the AUR, so I had to compile OpenZFS code myself. This
wasn't much of a problem.

Meanwhile, I also looked for "artix zfs" in my search engine and I
found this blog post that was funny to me because it's like the
counter part of the other post:

[[../img/btrfs_better_than_zfs.png]]

So well, installing ZFS from source wasn't much of a problem. After
building and installing it =modprobe zfs= just worked and I could
mount my pools just fine. And thus, restoring my data. so no big
problem there.

I wanted to try btrfs features because I am curious, and apparently
btrfs is "zfs for linux", so i wanted to try its features

Our man break19 was right, because if I want to add compression
to my storage devices I have to do some weird stuff in the fstab, and
that's too much, i prefer the old good "zfs set compression=gzip
zroot" rather than editing that file. I also can't play with btrfs
subvolumes or snapshots because the btrfs command line utility is
horrible and I haven't figured anything out.

** Package management and the power it holds

Different commands. Same shit, the only package managers that has
innovated in something are GNU Guix and Nix, but I don't think there
is much difference between =pkg= and =pacman=.

What is true is that =pacman= has a syntax that sucks, for example. in
FreeBSD you'd do =pkg install emacs=, while with Artix you do =pacman
-S emacs=, like I know what -S means, and apparently "pacman -Ss" is
better than "pacman search", so i prefer FreeBSD package manager.

But what was funny to me is that when I installed =clang=, pacman
notified me that also =gcc= will be installed. I thought this was very
curious so I asked in the artix IRC channel, the answer frightened me:

#+begin_src text
  <raoul>       | Hello, nice operating system and all, but I have a question
  why does clang depends on gcc
  <Dudemanguy> | it's because clang uses the standard library provided by gcc
  most linux distros are like this
#+end_src

As a computer user I tell you, that no big problem. But as a BSD user
I ask "why"?

I didn't know it, but pacman is very fast. It downloads things in
parallel and uses zstd, a fast compressing/decompressing software for
compression, so I have no issues with pacman's speed. It is pretty
fine.

When I did some research on why I couldn't install wine in Artix linux
I found out that my packages are being maintained by people with anime
profile pictures. And I also discovered that, for some reason, they
wanted to split all the repositories in separate repositories. Not
sure why, they have like 5 repositories for everything. I can
understand separating repositories with free/non-free software. But
here they don't even do that. They're just making thing more complex
for people who just want to install packages. In BSD this didn't
happen as the main repo had all the 30k packages someone would ever
need. And this operating system lacks packages. I had to build
=cmusfm= myself.

** Desktop
I hate to say it but Artix was less of a pain to setup as a desktop
than FreeBSD, this is because the installation was made with Calamares
installer. So I didn't had to install Xorg and configure manually, the
installer did all that for me. This wasn't the case in FreeBSD in
which I had to configure Xorg manually. And this is appreciated. The
Xfce setup just worked. And I bothered on ricing it like Windows XP
because I live in the past. Some people ask me why I riced it why XP,
the reason is because I can and I wanted.

I have 0 reasons to complain about Linux in this case. So I just
won't.
** Conclusion
If you haven't tried a BSD operating system. Don't, you'll get hooked to
it and if you ever have to come back to Linux, you'll find yourself
prefering to get a castration than installing Linux, because when you
learn how BSD works, and its awesome features, the development
philosophy (focusing in making a great operating system instead of
focusing in a weird definition of freedom), you start to know why
linux sucks.

